# Introduction to next-generation sequencing (NGS) data: tools and resources

Following the success of dye-terminator (Sanger) sequencing in the Human Genome Project, a "second" generation of sequencing technologies became available which were faster, cheaper and produced many more reads in parallel. Despite their higher throughput, the reads were shorter and of lower quality than those produced by Sanger sequencing. One high-throughput sequencing technology became ubiquitous, Illumina sequencing by synthesis (on GAI/GAII/HiSeq/ MiSeq/NextSeq instruments). This technology was developed by Cambridge scientists Shankar Balasubramanian and David Klenerman in the Department of Chemistry, who formed a company called Solexa in 1998. Illumina acquired Solexa in 2007. A third generation of sequencing machines from Pacific Biosciences (PacBio), Oxford Nanopore Technologies (ONT) and Ion Torrent have become available more recently, with PacBio and ONT providing average read lengths of 10--18 kilobases.

This practical aims to familiarise you with Illumina high-throughput sequencing data and some of the software available for their analysis.

If you have any questions, please email Andy Tock (ajt200@cam.ac.uk).

The NGS data we are going to analyse are derived from whole-genome sequencing of the Landsberg *erecta* (L*er*) ecotype of the model plant species *Arabidopsis thaliana*. The raw data are paired-end NGS reads in gzip-compressed FASTQ format, downloaded from the the European Nucleotide Archive (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/view/SRR3156163) and published in [Zapata et al. (2016) *PNAS* **113**](https://www.pnas.org/content/113/28/E4052). These files have been downloaded on the computers in the Craik-Marshall Building that you are accessing remotely, so there's no need to download them unless you are working on your own computer.
